# Meeting 0: 30 Aug 2018

Woooo--the Unsafe Code Guidelines working group is *officially* rebooted! See the [zulip log](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/136281-wg-unsafe-code-guidelines/topic/meeting.202018-08-30) for all of the gory details.

The meetings are intended to be mostly administrative and *not* focus on technical details, but rather evaluate the WG progress and see where we should focus our efforts.

## Takeaways
* We'll be moving meetings to (roughly) every 2 weeks on Thursdays at 1515 UTC (ping @nikomatsakis if you want an official calendar invite)
* Our very first **active discussion** will be...Data structure representation layout!
* The "validity invariant" discussion will be left as future work
* Let's make a [glossary] [glossary] to get everyone on the same terminology page

[glossary]: https://github.com/rust-rfcs/unsafe-code-guidelines/blob/master/reference/src/introduction.md

## What's next

Go discuss!
* Define "invalid ranges" for values we require currently and those we want to guarantee
* Which Rust types have defined binary representations
* If/when can you reinterpret a type?

Active topics are divided into [issues][active]. Keeping the discussions centralized in these issues should help us keep the discussion open and asynchronous. We're happy to reevaluate this approach--reach out to @avadacatavra or @nikomatsakis in [Zulip][zulip] if you have comments/concerns.

## Goals

* Reach a consensus on some representations and work towards a writeup on them (hopefully)
* Identify any areas where there's a less obvious answer and what the options are

[active]: https://github.com/rust-rfcs/unsafe-code-guidelines/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22active+discussion+topic%22
[zulip]: https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/136281-wg-unsafe-code-guidelines

See you in the GH discussion!
